We have just worked out a way to describe
the relationship between the rate of change
of its joint angles and the translational
and angular velocity of the robot’s end-effector.
Spatial velocity is a six-vector that comprises
the translational velocity, v, and the angular
velocity, omega. And, we wrote a relationship
between spatial velocity of the end-effector
and the velocity of the joint angles.
For a robot like this, the Jacobian matrix,
J, is a 6 x 6 matrix. It’s square. So, we
can rearrange this expression to obtain the
robot joint angle velocity that we need in
order to achieve a desired robot end-effector
spatial velocity and we can do this unless
the Jacobian is singular. That is its determinant
is equal to zero.
Unfortunately, there are some circumstances
where the Jacobian will be singular and one
of the singularities occurs when joint angle
five is equal to zero as shown here. If we
rotate joint 4, we can see how the robot end-effector
moves. If I move joint 6, we see that the
end-effector motion is exactly the same; it’s
that due to joint 4. So, if I rotate joints
4 and 6 in opposite directions, they cancel
each other out. They are both moving, but
the end-effector is not moving at all.
Following on from the earlier example, we
can test the determinant of the Jacobian matrix
for the joint angle configuration QN. And,
here we can see the determinant, and it’s
not equal to zero. It means I can then invert
the Jacobian matrix and this is what the inverse
Jacobian looks like. If we consider a different
joint angle configuration, I’m going to
look at the joint configuration Q0 which is
where all the joint angles equal to zero.
If I compute the Jacobian here and pass in
QZ, we can see this is what the Jacobian looks
like and the determinant in this particular
case is equal to zero.
So, let’s say, I’ve got a robot control problem
and I want the robot end-effector to have
a very specific spatial velocity denoted by
the Greek letter nu, then I can work out what
joint velocity I need in order to achieve
that. If I know the joint angles, and then
I can compute the Jacobian matrix and invert
it. And then, I move all the joints at that
particular speed and the robot end-effector
will move with the desired spatial velocity,
nu. Now, the problem is that because the robot
joint angles are changing, after a short while,
the Jacobian will be no longer appropriate
because the Jacobian is a function of the
joint angles. So, I will need to recompute
the Jacobian matrix.
If I was to write a computer algorithm to
do this, it would be a type of discrete time
algorithm. It would be computed at a number
of discrete time steps, time step 1, time
step 2, time step 3, and I’ll generalize
that to time step k. And, the interval between
time steps is given by the symbol delta T.
So, at time step, k, I will take the joint angles
that’s measured at time, k. I compute the
Jacobian, invert it, multiply it by the desired
spatial velocity and determine the joint angle
velocity that I need to achieve. If I multiply
the joint velocity by the time interval, delta
T, then I obtain the change in joint angles
over that time step. I add it to the current
set of joint angles and I end up with the
set of joint angles that I need to have at
the next time step, at time k+1. And, then
I tell my robot to move to that new set of
joint angles and I repeat the process.
We are now going to look at resolved-rate motion
control. And, I have already computed the
Jacobian matrix for the set of joint angles
which I call QN. Now, what I want to do is
to specify the spatial velocity that I want
my robot to have. I’m going to put that
in to a variable called, nu, which is the Greek
letter that I used to denote spatial velocity
and I am going to ask for a spatial velocity
of zero in x, zero in the y, one unit per
second in the z direction and no angular velocity.
And, I’m going to put that in to a column
vector. So, there we have it. If I now multiply
the inverse of the Jacobian by the desired
spatial velocity, and what I have here is
the joint angle velocity vector. This is the
set of joint angle velocities that will give
me the desired spatial velocity vector that’s
a motion of one unit per second in the vertical
or z direction.
We can see that it involves no motion at all
for joints 1 and 4 and it does require motion
of joints 2 and 3. That’s the shoulder and
the elbow joint and also joint 5, one of the
wrist joints. And, we can see that of all
the joints, it is the elbow joint, joint 3
that has to move the fastest in order to achieve
the desired motion.
Here is an animation that shows this in practice.
I have commanded the robot to move vertically
with a velocity of positive 1 in the world
z direction. We observed that the robot end-effector
moved that in constant velocity. But, if we
look at how the joint angles change as a function
of time, we see that they are not moving linearly.
We also know that some of the joint angles
are increasing in velocity. And, you notice
that as the robot got to the end of that motion,
it started to look a little bit awkward. It
can only move in the z direction for so long.
Eventually, it’s not going to be able to
reach the position that it needs to move to.